---
title: "Introduction"
description: "an introduction to my research interests"
date: 2022-03-10T04:53:07-05:00
draft: false
tags: [data-analysis, software-dev, webdev]
---

## Intro to me and my interests

(because this is my blog and obviously everything is about me)

Throughout my life, I have been presented with many different opportunities to engage with technology and with every experience I have had, I have been able to hone in my focus more on topics I enjoy. I've been able to work on the hardware and software of a computer through my job as an IT intern in high school, which I loved doing since I really liked physically working with the internal parts of a computer and interacting with customers. Upon graduation, I went to a web development coding camp, where I learned the basics to web development and developed my own projects, which helped me develop some confidence in myself as a computer scientist. In college, I've been able to pursue mostly software development and some data analysis and web development, which are all conveniently my main areas of interest in the realm of Computer Science. I would say out of the three, data analytics is probably my favorite field and I think a lot of that has to do with how recent my exposure to it was. Last semester, I took a Data Analytics course that helped me immediately broaden my scope in terms of understanding the jobs that are available for me to pursue upon graduation, while also giving me an *unintentionally* interdisciplinary course that is heavily influenced by statistical knowledge and understanding, which I am very familiar with as a result of my background in Economics. I like how data analysis feels very dynamic and almost like a *mission to uncover truths*, since it involves the process of cleaning the data, analyzing the relationships present, and making conclusions on those relationships which can teach you something (or many things) new about a group of people, a place, and many other things. I like how data analysis is not just coding but also writing and critically thinking about what the code you wrote is doing to the data, and making sure it is displaying what you want. I also really enjoy web development, since it allows me to be creative and I love being able to have a "physical" (as physical as a website can be) representation of my work. Software development, I enjoy, but it's a little hit or miss for me since I have often engaged in doing it for projects I am not necessarily passionate about. I especially enjoy the success that comes with building a successful tool in software development. In terms of what topics I would like to focus my research in, I want to make sure I am taking into account that I want to combine my comp for Computer Science and Economics, and having considered that, I think data analysis may be a good option. I also think that if I developed an application focused on analyzing markets or projecting trends, that it could also be a good application of both disciplines. Overall, I have some sense of the topics I am interested in but I don't have a good sense of what I want to focus on and if I should focus more on the field (i.e. data analysis) or the application (i.e. analyzing a data set about SAT testing scores across the country), so I would want some guidance in that regard. I think what makes it difficult for me to find a focus is because I do find myself being interested in and enjoying many things, but I am excited to go through the process of researching to find my focus.
