---
title: "Proposal"
description: "my research proposal"
date: 2022-05-17T00:41:02-04:00
draft: false
tag: [R, data-analysis, fusion-analysis]
---

## Table of Contents

1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Literature](#literature)
3. [Methodology and Prototype](#methodology-and-prototype)
4. [Experimentation and Results](#experimentation-and-results)
5. [Conclusion](#conclusion)
6. [References](#references)

---

#### Introduction

In my proposed project, I would like to research and study the impact that income (socioeconomic status) has on education (access to education and educational attainment). This is a topic of interest to me because having experienced the benefits of a private school education all of my life, I was able to have an educational journey beyond that of what would've been my reality in the public school system I was zoned to. These private schools I attended provided me with classes and 1-on-1 attention I would've otherwise never have had in public school. Knowing from first-hand experience how income can impact education, I think that this is a worthwhile issue to delve into. Additionally, I think this type of research can have an impact in that there can be policy that results from this which could work to increase the accessibility and quality of education to low income individuals.

There is evidence in how income, and more specifically socioeconomic status, can impact one's education. For example, children from families with a low socioeconomic status "are less likely to have experiences that encourage the development of fundamental skills of reading acquisition" and "to have access to informational resources about college". (APA) Not only are access to education and development of certain skills impacted by socioeconomic status, but so is academic achievement; low-income children "enter high school with average literacy skills five years behind those of high-income students", have a lower success rate in the fields of "science, technology, engineering, and mathematics" than those not from underrepresented groups, and have a higher likelihood of dropping out of high school (11.6%) compared to their high-income counterparts (2.8%). (APA)

I plan on studying the impact income/socioeconomic status has on education/educational attainment by developing a tool, using R and R-Studio (for now), that will analyze one or more datasets to create visualizations from and run statistical tests on, in order to make conclusions about the population(s) being studied in the sample data. I also plan to employ a specific type of analysis with this data, called *fusion analytics*, which much like the namesake suggests, combines two forms of analysis in order to further bolster results. In my case, I will be using fusion analysis by combining traditional data analysis and traditional economic/econometric analysis.

#### Literature

My research began with looking more deeply into the area of *data analytics* and was able to get a more concise look into the types of tools and methodology I might have to use in developing my senior project. The most helpful research I found described the many tools that can be used for Data Analysis including (but not limited to) Microsoft Excel, Microsoft SQL, R, Python, RapidMiner, Spark, Hadoop, KNIME, SAS, and Tableau, which was relevant to my work because they are different options I have for performing analysis on data and each has their own strengths and weaknesses. (Bonthu)

I also encountered articles related to how "big data" has impacted and will continue to impact economic policy and research. This was relevant to my senior comp, as I will need to integrate Computer Science and Economics in my development and completion of the project, as I am a double major. Keeping this in mind, I wanted to be able to understand different angles I can go about integrating my two areas of study. The biggest contibution big data has had to the area of economics is in allowing for more readily-accessible real-time data, which is in large scale. On the other hand, the main challenges to using big data on economic research include data access, management, and computation, as well as, making sure to ask the right questions of the data. (Einav)

As mentioned in the introduction, my main goal in developing my prototype is to determine whether income impacts education access and/or educational attainment. My project's concentration aligns with my own interests as access to education and income mobility and their socioeconomic impacts have always been of great interest to me, especially given my own personal experiences and background. Coming from a low-income, single-parent household, and being a person of color, there are many challeges my family and I faced in fighting for the education I had the opportunity of experiencing. I was a scholarship student all of my life, which allowed me the great privilege of attending private school for all of my years of schooling, opening a whole "Pandora's box" of opportunities I would've otherwise not have had in public school. One of the greatest opportunities I had was my technology education, as I was able to, as a high schooler, work as an IT intern that was able to identify and repair hardware and software issues in computers. Having experienced and seen the differences in education I had compared to my peers, my family, and my friends, I have always been concerned in education and specifically in advocating for increasing the access to education (especially specialized classes like computer science classes, AP/IB offerings, in various arts, etc.) among communities that are underrepresented (low-income, BIPOC, etc.).

In the literature I consulted to get a more detailed insight into my research focus, I found that "the impact of poverty on a child's academic achievement is significant and starts early" and contributes to lower levels of academic achievement which can begin as early as "kindergarten and extends through elementary and high school", which can have implications for whether a person will be able to enter, access, and succeed in postsecondary education. (Taylor) Other staggering findings include that "low income students are five times more likely to drop out of high school and 13 times less likely to graduate high school on time" compared to their high income counterparts. (Taylor) The quality of education a child receives is deeply intertwined with whether or not they will be set up with the tools for success in higher levels of education. Education access is also heavily related to income mobility and is a big determinant in whether a person will change income brackets throughout the span of their lives or stay within the realm of the income bracket they were raised in. Income is highly related to the types of resources that a person has at their disposal and in specific regard to education, the types of class offerings, amount and variety of resources, and quality of teachers. My main interest and goal in looking at how income impacts education, I am concerned with seeing mobility in income and educational attainment. The process for which I will be answering this question includes identifying appropriate and reliable dataset(s) to use, creating visualizations and running statistical tests on the data, and using results from these tests and visualizations in order to make some conclusions about the population(s) being discussed.

A knowledge gap that emerges from my chosen area of research, and more specifically my selected methodology for my analysis, is that of a combined analysis using traditional big data analytics technology and results, in conjunction with the traditional economic and econometric methodology. More specifically, at the beginning of my research efforts for this project and prototype, I was looking for studies that would combine both of my fields of study, Computer Science and Economics, in order to have analysis of an interdisciplinary nature and was able to find a couple of articles on *fusion analytics*. In the literature I referenced, *fusion analysis* is when the machine-based methods that are present in Computer Science are combined with the explanatory empiricisim involving advanced Economic, Econometrics, and Statistics. For my project and prototype, my goal is to explore the use of fusion analytics and working on ways to combine the machine-based analysis that Computer Science brings with the theoretical and real-world analysis that Economics brings, especially because these are both my fields of concentration. After reading up extensively on fusion analytics, I found that not only Computer Science, Econometrics, and Statistics methods and techniques can be used in conjunction, but other fields like business analytics and policy analytics can be used. The most important factor to consider when wanting to employ fusion analytics is whether or not the implementation of a combined analysis will bolster the results you get and need to answer your question(s) of interest.

This gap is relevant to bridge as it can be a beginning to a whole new way of analyzing data, as well as improving upon the current types of analysis that can be perfomed on data. It's also valuable in that employing fusion analysis will result in more detailed insights on the data and what it covers, and by providing a basis for more sophisticated counterfactual impact analysis. By combining explanatory empiricism and computational power, you not only have the benefit of being able to quickly create, run, and test thousands of hypotheses, models, and simulations, while also having the benefit of statistical and econometric methods, and policy/business informed decisions.

#### Methodology and Prototype

The research question that motivates my research project is whether income has an impact on education (access and attainment). Specifically, I want to see if impoverished communities experience less access to education, potentially impacting their educational attainment levels. The scope of this work is currently focused on the United States, more specifically given the data I employ in my prototype, California. While this work is feasible, it is difficult to find all-encompassing data sets that included all of the variables I wanted to study. Additionally, given that I will be employing fusion analysis in my work, I have also found it difficult to find successful executions in the literature; instead, I have mostly encountered the term being referred to in theory. Given these roadblocks, I will need to figure out two things in the future development of this project. These include finding more appropriate data and/or harvesting my own data, as well as, finding more concrete examples of fusion analysis that I can model my work after.

In order to answer my question of interest, I knew I needed to develop a prototype and run an experiment that would work to take in the praxis I want to use for my analysis (fusion analysis), as well as, successfully work and run. In the development of my prototype, I had a main driving goal which was to develop a tool that would automatically harvest a dataset from a site and download it to be used in R-Studio. My prototype employs R and R-Studio in its implementation and subsequently, both are needed to run the tool. The main functionality of the prototype is to take a given URL to harvest data from, download dataset to local machine, wrangle dataset to relevant variables, and create visualizations from data. For my tool, the dataset being used is the [California Educational Attainment and Personal Income](https://data.ca.gov/dataset/ca-educational-attainment-personal-income), which is data captured by the U.S. Census Current Population Survey (CPS). The dataset includes information on the year the data is captured, the age and gender of the person being surveyed, the level of educational attainment, personal income of the respondent, and the number of people who fall into the same category (given the prior values). I chose this dataset as it was the closest to the variables I wanted to analyze, education and income, and was more easily processed by my machine over alternative datasets I had been looking at. It's important to note that this dataset has been wrangled to only focus on respondents in the age group 18-64, as to focus on those people who have completed most of their formal education. Additionally, the dataset is wrangled to only include incomes at or below the poverty line threshold (>= $24,000/yr), in order to focus on educational attainment of those in poverty. The dataset is further filtered by the year and gender, in order to further focus on a particular year's values and a particular gender's earnings and educational attainment, as to be able to compare across either years or gender, or both. The tool can be run by opening the file that hosts the code, prototype-code.R, on R-Studio and going line by line to run the commands.

The prototype I developed had a successful initial run, during its initial development, through which I was able to create visualizations for the 2008 data and draw conclusions for that year's worth of data and what it represents. Upon later consideration, I realize that I will need to utilizae a better dataset for my analysis, as the one employed in my prototype lacks the amount of numerical values I would want in order to perform more qualitative analysis through statistical tests. Given this observation, I will either need to look into finding a new data set, merging several datasets, collecting my own data, or changing my focus area, which will be my focus to figure out this summer and into the first few weeks of senior year.

#### Experimentation and Results

My experiment takes the data set that my prototype was based on, [California Educational Attainment and Personal Income](https://data.ca.gov/dataset/ca-educational-attainment-personal-income), and expands upon the analysis that was performed for 2008 data. My intention in creating my prototype is to look into how poverty effects educational attainment and/or access to education. The main goal of my experiment is to answer the question of how educational attainment for those below the poverty line changed between the 2008 and 2010 in California. I also separate my analysis by gender to see differences in rates of educational attainment and the differences in the amount of people experiencing poverty between both genders.

My first step in developing the experiment for the protoype I made was to revise the prototype. After completing my initial prototype submission, I found that I had discovered some tweaks I wanted to make in the current code in order to make the visualizations more concise and specifically wanted to look to combine the legends of the combined plots I made and add separate titles to the plots. Next, I needed to wrangle the 2010 data, like I did the 2008 data, because my intention was to study how poverty levels, educational attainment, and income levels changed between both years for people in California. Next I needed to create visualizations of 2010 data, similar to what I did for the 2008 graphs, and then create comparative visualizations of the 2008 and 2010 data to further show the differences between both years. The last step in my experiment was to take the results from the visualizations and make some conclusions about the population at the time and how the different population, poverty, and educational metrics changed for them between 2008 and 2010.

The experiment spanned over several days, admittedly because I really needed a break between trying to figure out how to get my visualizations to display just like I wanted and then interpreting the results from the new visualizations I made. I took a fair bit of time making the adjustments to the code for the initial visualizations I made for the 2008 data, as they are what I based the newer visualizations I created in my experiment on. After successfully combining the legends like how I wanted and adjusting the initial visualizations to my liking, then I went to wrangle my initial data set for 2010 data, which was relatively simple. Then I created the visualization for 2010, which because they were similar to the construction for the 2008 visualizations, this was also relatively simple. The last part of my experimentation was to take the visualizations and make conclusions from the about the population, which took some time as I needed to refresh my knowledge on certain statistics of the population so I could make accurate comparisons and conclusions.

Some general considerations for my data to keep in mind for the conclusions I arrived to include that the individuals accounted for in the data are aged 18-64, a low-income individual in California earned about or less than $10,000 USD/yr, a low-income family (of 4) earned about $24,000 USD/year or less, the data accounts for high school and college-aged individuals who may still be dependents, accounts for potential retirees (those 55+), and the age range given in the data make difficult to make interpretations and get accurate, in-depth results geared to specific age groups.

Considering the population of California is 36.54 million in 2008, we can make the following conclusions about the population at the time. The highest female value is 740,143 women, who fit into the category of no high school diploma and no income, which accounted for about 2% of the Californian population at the time. This value may be so high because the women accounted for in this sample could either be married and dependent on spousal income or single and dependent on familial income, which is likely given the wide range in age. The highest recorded male value, on the other hand, was 573,769 men and included those who had received no high school diploma and earned an income between $15,000 and $24,999 USD/year, which accounted for about 1.6% of the population at the time. These results could indicate that more high-school aged and/or older males are inclined and/or expected to work, contributing to the high count. The visualization accounting for female data points accounts for 5,434,192 women, which was about 14.9% of the population at the time. On the other hand, the visualization accounting for male data points accounted for 4,057,275 men, which was about 11.1% of the population at the time. The combined total of people living under the poverty line was 9,1491,467 people, which was about 25.98% of California's population at the time, which indicates that about a fourth of the population lives in poverty. Other conclusions we can make include that more women live under the poverty line, have no income, and no high school diploma than men. The findings also show fewer men in the sample, which could indicae that more men live above the poverty line than women.

Considering the population of California is 37.27 million in 2010, we can make the following conclusions about the population at the time. In this visualization, the highest recorded female value was 666,858 women, who into the categories of having received no high school diploma and no income, and accounted for about 1.8% of the population at the time. We can make similar considerations of these findings like we did for 2008 in that the women in this sample could either be married and dependent on spouse's income or single and dependent on family's income. To contrast, the highest recorded male value is 535,027 men, who fit into the categories of having received no high school diploma and earning an income between $15,000-24,999 USD/year, accounting for about 1.4% of the population at the time. We will also make similar considerations to what we did for the 2008 data in that the number of men in this sample could indicate more high-school aged and/or older males are inclined and/or expected to work, contributing to the high count. The female graph accounts for 5,575,978 people, about 14.96% of the population at the time, and from this total, 897,367 women have a bachelor's degree or higher, 1,461,702 women have hs or equiv. education, 1,444,492 women have no hs diploma, and 1,772,417 women have completed some college, less than 4yr degree. On the other hand, the male graph accounts for 4,377,997 people, about 11.75% of the population at the time. 550,304 men have a bachelor's degree, 1,279,104 men have high school or equivalent education, 1,426,338 men have no high school diploma, and 1,122,251 men some college, but less than a 4yr degree. In 2010, 9,953,975 people lived under the poverty line, about 26.7% of the population at the time. In 2010, there are 462,508 more people living under the poverty line than in 2008. Other conclusions include that more women live under the poverty line than men in CA, have no income, and no high school diploma.

In comparing 2008 and 2010 findings and results, I first compared the differences in populations between both years. Given that population in 2008 was 36.54 million and in 2010 was 37.27 million, we can conclude that population rose by 730,000 between 2008 and 2010. 

Comparing the values of educational attainment for women for both 2008 and 2010, I made the following conclusions. There were 73,285 fewer women with no income and no hs diploma in 2010 than in 2008, which indicates more women had a high school diploma and/or received an income in 2010 than in 2008. There were 141,786 fewer women under the poverty line in 2010 than in 2008. There are 46,599 more women below the poverty line with bachelor's degrees or higher in 2010 than in 2008. 28,814 more women have hs or equivalent education in 2008 than in 2010. 94,924 fewer women that have no high school diploma in 2010 than in 2008. There are 161,297 more women that have completed some college in 2010 than in 2008.

Comparing the values of educational attainment for males for both 2008 and 2010, I made the following conclusions. There were 38,742 men who either have started earning different incomes or earning high school diplomas, or getting out of the "poverty line". There were 320,722 more men that feel below the poverty line between 2008 and 2010. 114,258 more men received a bachelor's degree in 2010 than in 2008. There were 63,696 more men who received a high school or equivalent education. There were 111,015 more men who had no hs diploma and there were 31,753 more men who had some college, but less than a 4 yr degree.

#### Conclusion

In order to completely and concisely explain and visualize the results from my experiment, I developed a report from the visualizations and developed some conclusions from the visualizations, with the help of some background research. Some ethical concerns I have for my future work and research is to use appropriate, all-encompassing data, as well as, concerns with data security. I could work around these concerns by only sourcing my data from reliable sites, storing data in a secured database, and/or collecting my own data that would follow my own code of ethics. The next steps in the development and completion of my research project include finding more data and/or other data to use to answer my question of interest and finding enough literature related to the data or problem I want to focus on.

#### References

- [Education and Socioeconomic Status](https://www.apa.org/pi/ses/resources/publications/education)
- [Review of Leading Data Analytics Tools](https://www.sciencepubco.com/index.php/ijet/article/view/18190/8461)
- [Income-Based Inequality in Educational Outcomes: Learning From State Longitudinal Data Systems](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.3102/0162373715576364)
- [The Data Revolution and Economic Analysis](https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/full/10.1086/674019)
- [Social Innovation Blog: Understanding the Link Between Neighborhoods and Schools](https://socialinnovation.usc.edu/understanding-the-link-between-neighborhoods-and-schools/)
- [Poverty's Long-Lasting Effects on Students' Education and Success](https://www.insightintodiversity.com/povertys-long-lasting-effects-on-students-education-and-success/)
 - [Computational Social Science Fusion Analytics: Combining Machine-Based Methods with Explanatory Empiricism](https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/bitstream/10125/41775/paper0626.pdf)
 - [Combining machine-based and econometrics methods for policy analytics insights](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1567422317300145?via%3Dihub)
 - [Music popularity, diffusion, and recommendation in social networks: A fusion analytics approach](https://ink.library.smu.edu.sg/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1181&context=etd_coll)
